---
source: Csound Reference Manual
url: https://csound.com/docs/manual/sr.html
opcode: sr
category: Orchestra Syntax:Header
description: "Sets the audio sampling rate...."
related: ["Orchestra Header Statements"]
---

<!--
id:sr
category:Orchestra Syntax:Header
-->
# sr
Sets the audio sampling rate.

These statements are global value [assignments](../opcodes/assign.md), made at the beginning of an orchestra, before any instrument block is defined. Their function is to set certain [reserved symbol variables](../orch/data-types.md#constants-and-reserved-symbols) that are required for performance. Once set, these reserved symbols can be used in expressions anywhere in the orchestra.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
sr = iarg
```

### Initialization

_sr_  = (optional) -- set sampling rate to _iarg_ samples per second per channel. The default value is 44100.

In addition, any [global variable](../orch/data-types.md) can be initialized by an _init-time assignment_ anywhere before the first [instr statement](../opcodes/instr.md).  All of the above assignments are run as instrument 0 (i-pass only) at the start of real performance.

Beginning with Csound version 3.46, _sr_ may be omitted. The sample rate will be calculated from [kr](../opcodes/kr.md) and [ksmps](../opcodes/ksmps.md), but this must evaluate to an integer. If none of these global values is defined, the sample rate will default to 44100. You will usually want to use a value that your soundcard supports, like 44100 or 48000, otherwise, the audio generated by csound may be unplayable, or you will get an error if you attempt to run in real-time. You may naturally use a sample rate like 96000, for off-line rendering even if your soundcard does not support it. Csound will generate a valid file that can be played on capable systems.

## Examples

``` csound-orc
sr = 10000
kr = 500
ksmps = 20
gi1 = sr/2.
ga init 0
itranspose = octpch(.0l)
```

Here is another example of the sr opcode. It uses the file [sr.csd](../examples/sr.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the sr opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/sr.csd"
```

Its output should include lines like this:

```
maximum number of harmonics = 240
maximum number of harmonics = 24
maximum number of harmonics = 2
```

## See also

[Orchestra Header Statements](../orch/header.md)
